INFORMATION
SYSTEMS 3A
Agile Software
Development
2025 1

Contents
• Agile methods
• Agile development techniques
• Agile project management
• Scaling agile methods

Plan-driven and agile development
Plan-driven development
• A plan-driven approach to software engineering is based
around separate development stages with the outputs to be
produced at each of these stages planned in advance.
Agile development
• Specification, design, implementation and testing are
interleaved and the outputs from the development process are
decided through a process of negotiation during the software
development process

Agile software development
• The agile software development methodology has recently become one of
the most used software development techniques. Rather than the long-
drawn-out release cycles in the previously popular waterfall methodology,
the agile technique suggests regular short sprint release cycles.
• This allows the customers and stakeholders to have more involvement within
the software development process. This helps promote a higher quality final
product because it combats the difficult task of a customer fully
understanding and identifying all requirements in the software project
planning phase. This also allows for the stakeholders to adjust the priorities
of remaining tasks easily throughout the entire software development
process.

Agile software development
• Dissatisfaction with the overheads involved in software design
methods of the 1980s and 1990s led to the creation of agile
methods. These methods:
• Focus on the code rather than the design
• Are based on an iterative approach to software development
• Are intended to deliver working software quickly and evolve this rapidly
to meet changing requirements
• The aim of agile methods is to reduce overheads in the
software process (e.g., by limiting documentation) and to be
able to respond quickly to changing requirements without
excessive rework

Agile software development
• Program specification, design and implementation are inter-
leaved.
• The system is developed as a series of versions or increments with
stakeholders involved in version specification and evaluation.
• Frequent delivery of new versions for evaluation.
• Extensive tool support (e.g. automated testing tools) used to
support development.
• Minimal documentation – focus on working code.

Plan-driven and agile development

Key characteristics of agile process
models
➢Stronger focus on specification, design and implementation
➢Do enough documentation to move on
➢Incremental delivery
➢Client involvement
➢Dependency on automated tool support
➢Ability to respond to project change
➢Effective communication among all stakeholders
➢Drawing the customer into the team
➢Organizing a team so that it is in control of the work performed

Agile manifesto
• We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it
and helping others do it. Through this work we have come to value:
➢ Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan
➢ That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we value the
items on the left more.

The principles of Agile Methods

Agile method applicability
• Product development where a software company is developing
a small or medium-sized product for sale.
• Custom system development within an organization, where
there is a clear commitment from the customer to become
involved in the development process and where there are few
external rules and regulations that affect the software.

Agile development methods techniques
Extreme
Programming Scrum Kanban
(XP)

Extreme programming (XP)
• A very influential agile method, developed in the late 1990s, that
introduced a range of agile development techniques.
• Extreme Programming (XP) takes an ‘extreme’ approach to
iterative development.
• New versions may be built several times per day;
• Increments are delivered to customers every 2 weeks;
• All tests must be run for every build and the build is only accepted if tests
run successfully.

Extreme programming release cycle

Extreme programming practices (a)

Extreme programming practices (b)

Influential XP practices
• Extreme programming has a technical focus and is not easy to
integrate with management practice in most organizations
• Consequently, while agile development uses practices from XP,
the method as originally defined is not widely used
• Key practices
• User stories for specification
• Refactoring
• Test-first development
• Pair programming

User stories for specification
In XP, a customer or user is part of the XP team and is
responsible for making decisions on requirements.
User requirements are expressed as scenarios or user stories.
These are written on cards and the development team break
them down into implementation tasks. These tasks are the
basis of schedule and cost estimates.
The customer chooses the stories for inclusion in the next
release based on their priorities and the schedule estimates.

A ‘prescribing medication’ story

Refactoring (Cleaning up the code)
• In Extreme Programming (XP), refactoring is the practice of
continuously improving code without changing its external behavior. It
helps keep the code clean, simple, and maintainable.
➢ More efficient
➢ Helps in finding the Bugs
➢ Remove duplicates
➢ Replacement of similar code sections
➢ Makes software easier to understand
➢ Improves the design of software
➢ Also helps in executing the program faster

Examples of refactoring
Re-organization of a class hierarchy to remove duplicate code
Tidying up and renaming attributes and methods to make them
easier to understand
The replacement of inline code with calls to methods that have
been included in a program library

Test-first development
Writing tests before code clarifies the requirements to be implemented
Tests are written as programs rather than data so that they can be
executed automatically. The test includes a check that it has executed
correctly.
▪ Usually relies on a testing framework such as Junit
All previous and new tests are run automatically when new functionality is
added, thus checking that the new functionality has not introduced errors
XP testing features:
▪ Test-first development
▪ Incremental test development from scenarios
▪ User involvement in test development and validation
▪ Automated test harnesses are used to run all component tests each time that a new
release is built.

Pair programming
In XP, programmers work in pairs, sitting together to develop code.
This helps develop common ownership of code and spreads
knowledge across the team.
It serves as an informal review process as each line of code is
looked at by more than one person.
It encourages refactoring as the whole team can benefit from this.
In pair programming, programmers sit together at the same
computer to develop the software.
Pairs are created dynamically so that all team members work with
each other during the development process.

Scrum
• The Scrum approach is a general agile method, but its focus is
on managing iterative development rather than specific agile
practices
• There are three phases in Scrum:
• The initial phase is an outline planning phase where you establish the
general objectives for the project and design the software architecture
• This is followed by a series of sprint cycles, where each cycle develops
an increment of the system
• The project closure phase wraps up the project, completes required
documentation such as system help frames and user manuals and
assesses the lessons learned from the project

Roles in Scrum
There are three different roles needed in doing the scrum method, namely:
➢ Scrum Master : Scrum master is like a team coach who helps everyone follow the Scrum process
smoothly. They don’t manage the team but make sure work happens without problems.
➢ Product Owner: Product Owner is the decision-maker in a Scrum team. They make sure the team is
building the right product by setting priorities and defining features.The product owner can be a
customer but might also be a product manager in a software company or other stakeholder
representative.
➢ Scrum Team: Scrum team is a small, self-organizing group of people who work together to complete
a project using the Scrum framework. It includes a mix of roles, with everyone working collaboratively
to deliver value in short cycles (sprints).

The scrum sprint cycle
Sprints are fixed length, normally 2–4 weeks.
The starting point for planning is the product backlog, which is
the list of work to be done on the project
The selection phase involves all of the project team who work
with the customer to select the features and functionality to be
developed during the sprint

Teamwork in Scrum
The Scrum master is a facilitator who arranges daily meetings,
tracks the backlog of work to be done, records decisions,
measures progress against the backlog and communicates with
customers and management outside of the team
The whole team attends short daily meetings which are
referred as daily stand-up meeting where all team members
share information, describe their progress since the last
meeting, problems that have arisen and what is planned for the
following day
▪ This means that everyone on the team knows what is going on and, if
problems arise, can re-plan short-term work to cope with them

Scrum benefits
The product is broken down into a set of manageable and
understandable chunks
The whole team have visibility of everything and consequently
team communication is improved
Customers see on-time delivery of increments and gain
feedback on how the product works
Trust between customers and developers is established and a
positive culture is created in which everyone expects the project
to succeed

Scrum
2025 29

Kanban
• Kanban is an Agile framework that emphasizes visualization,
workflow management, and continuous improvement.
• It involves creating a visual board that represents the work that
needs to be done, the work that is in progress, and the work that has
been completed.
• It is designed to help teams manage their work more efficiently by
visualizing the workflow, limiting work in progress (WIP), and
optimizing the flow of tasks or work items from start to finish.
• Kanban uses a kanban board to represent work items as cards that
move through different stages of a workflow.

What is the difference between a Kanban board
and a Kanban card?
• A Kanban card represents an individual task within a workflow.
• Kanban cards include detailed information about each task, including its
status, owner, and priority.
• A Kanban board is a visual tool that displays an entire workflow.
• The Kanban board brings the Kanban cards together to give the team an
overall view of a project.

Kanban Methodology

Four core principles make up the Kanban
framework
• Start with what you know
• Pursue incremental change
• Respect the current process
• Encourage leadership at all levels

Kanban Key practices
• Visualize the workflow: Make the process transparent and easy to
understand.
• Limit work-in-progress (WIP): Reduce bottlenecks and improve flow by
limiting the number of tasks in each stage.
• Focus on flow: Prioritize the continuous movement of work through the
system.
• Make explicit policies for the workflow: Establish clear rules and
procedures for how work moves through the process.
• Implement feedback loops: Continuously monitor and improve the
process based on real-time data

Benefits of the Kanban method
The Kanban method offers a range of advantages that streamline project
management and enhance team performance, including:
• Improved workflow: By visualizing tasks on a Kanban board, teams
can identify bottlenecks and optimize workflows.
• Increased efficiency: Limiting WIP ensures that team members focus
on completing tasks instead of feeling overwhelmed with multitasking.
• Enhanced collaboration: The visual nature of Kanban boards fosters a
collaborative environment, as everyone is aware of their
responsibilities and the status of each task.

Scrum Vs Kanban

Scaling agile methods
Agile methods have proved to be successful for small and
medium sized projects that can be developed by a small co-
located team
It is sometimes argued that the success of these methods
comes because of improved communications which is possible
when everyone is working together
Scaling up agile methods involves changing these to cope with
larger, longer projects where there are multiple development
teams, perhaps working in different locations

Scaling out and scaling up
• 'Scaling up' is concerned with using agile methods for
developing large software systems that cannot be developed by
a small team
• 'Scaling out' is concerned with how agile methods can be
introduced across a large organization with many years of
software development experience
• When scaling agile methods, it is important to maintain agile
fundamentals:
• Flexible planning, frequent system releases, continuous integration,
test-driven development, and good team communication

Agile across organizations
Some barriers to agile adoption:
➢Project managers are largely inexperienced with agile
➢Bureaucratic procedures that are necessary for quality
➢Needs highly and multi-skilled team members
➢Well ingrained plan-driven processes

Agile maintenance
Key problems are:
• Lack of product documentation
• Keeping customers involved in the development process
• Maintaining the continuity of the development team

Agile or Plan Driven(How to decide?)
• What factors should the team consider before choosing?

Agile methods across organizations
• Project managers who do not have experience of agile methods may be
reluctant to accept the risk of a new approach.
• Large organizations often have quality procedures and standards that
all projects are expected to follow, and, because of their bureaucratic
nature, these are likely to be incompatible with agile methods.
• Agile methods seem to work best when team members have a
relatively high skill level. However, within large organizations, there are
likely to be a wide range of skills and abilities.
• There may be cultural resistance to agile methods, especially in those
organizations that have a long history of using conventional systems
engineering processes.

